Many popular and effective regression and classification algorithms rely upon linear models. While these approximations may prove to be effective, the true underlying function being modeled is unlikely to be linear. In order to accurately model reality, it is necessary or just beneficial to exceed linearity, which can be accomplished by deriving, or engineering, new features from the data already available. The simplest form is _linear basis expansion_, which derives new features from applying simple mathematical functions to the existing features. Popular choices are _log and power functions_, _differences and ratios_, _counts_, _polynomials_, and _rational differences and polynomials_. These derived features can be appended to the existing feature set, or replace it altogether.

## Logarithms & Power Functions

Logarithms and power functions are probbaly the most popular choice of feature transformations.

$$x_{new} = log(x)$$

$$x_{new} = x^2$$

$$x_{new} = x^{\frac{1}{2}}$$

## Differences & Ratios

Differences and ratios are simply subtractions and fractions, respectively.

$$x_{new} = x_1 - x_2$$

$$x_{new} = \frac{x_1}{x_2}$$

## Counts

This derived feature is a count of the number of features within a given observation that meets a particular criteria. For instance, if we were to count the features that have a negative value, the derived feature would be 

$$x_{new} = \sum_i 1\ if\ x_i < 0\ else\ 0$$

Assuming that the observation vector had 5 values, and 2 of them were negative values, then in this hypothetical case $x_{new}$ would equal 2.

## Polynomials

Derived features can also be generated by polynomials. For example, 

$$x_{new} = 3x^2 + 2x + 8$$

or

$$x_{new} = x^3 + 5x - 10$$

## Rational Differences & Polynomials

Combining rational equations and polynomials can also prove to be useful derived features. For example, a _rational difference_ could take the form

$$x_{new} = \frac{x_2 - x_4}{x_1^2 - x_3^2}$$

and a _rational polynomial_ could take the form

$$x_{new} = \frac{2x_1 + 2x_3 + 4x_4^3}{3}$$